today we're going to look at the world
of rome through the eyes of a young girl
here she is drawing a picture of herself
in the atrium
of her father's enormous house her name
is dimitia and she is just five years
old
she has an older brother who is 14.
lucius
domitius ahenna barbus named after her
dad
girls don't get these long names that
boys have what it's worth
is that dad insists on calling all his
daughters
domitia let's call the dimittia drawing
on the column domitia three
she has an older sister domitia two who
is seven years old
and then there is demeter one who is ten
there would have been a dimity of four
but mum died
trying to give birth to her three years
ago confused
the romans were too they could work out
ancestry
through the male line with the nice
tripartite names
such as lucius domitius ahenna barbers
but they got in a real mess over which
dimitya was married to whom
and was either the great aunt or the
great stepmother
and so on to whom when they came to
write it down
domitia 3 is not just drawing on the
pillar
she is also watching the action you see
it's early
and the time of day when all her dad's
clients and friends
come to see him at home to pay their
respects
lucius papidius secundus a 17 year old
who wants to marry domitia
ii within the next five to seven years
has come as well
he seems to be wooing not his future
wife but her dad
poor lucius he does not know that
domitia's dad thinks he and his family
are wealthy
but still scumbags from the suburb after
all
it is the part of rome full of barbers
and prostitutes
suddenly all the men are leaving with
dad it's the second hour
and time for him to be in court with a
sturdy audience of clients to applaud
his rhetoric
and hiss at his opponent the house is
now quieter
the men won't return for seven hours not
until dinner time
but what happens in the house for those
seven hours
what do domitia domitia and domitia do
all day
not an easy question everything written
down by the romans
that we have today was written by men
this makes constructing the lives of
women
difficult however we can't have a
history
of just roman men so here goes
we can begin in the atrium there is a
massive loom on which dad's latest
wife is working on a new toga domitia
dimittier and domitia
are tasked with spinning the wall that
will be used to weave
this mighty garment 30 or more feet long
an elliptical in shape romans love the
idea
that their wives work wool we know that
because it's written
on the gravestones of so many roman
women
unlike women in greece roman women go
out the house and move about the city
they go to the bars in the morning
to avoid the men or to separate baths
that are for women only
some do go in for the latest fad of the
80s 70s
nude bathing with men present
where they have no place is where the
men are in the forum
in the law court or in the senate house
their place in public is in the porticos
with gardens
with sculpture and with pathways for
walking in
when dimittier domitia and domitia want
to leave the house to go somewhere
like the portico of libya they must get
ready
domitia 2 and domitia 3 are ready
but domitia one who is betrothed to be
married in two years
to darling philates isn't ready
she's not slow she just has more to do
being betrothed means
she wears the insignia of betrothal
engagement rings and all the gifts
philatus has given her
jewels earrings necklaces amber pendants
she may even wear her myrtle crown all
this bling shouts i'm getting married to
that 19 year old who gave me all this
stuff i'm wearing
whilst they wait dimitia 2 and mitia 3
play with their dolls that mirror the
image of their sister
decked out to be married one day these
dolls will be dedicated to household
gods on the day
of their wedding okay we're ready
the girls step into litters carried by
some burly slaves
they also have a chaperone with them and
will be meeting an aunt
at the porticus of libya carried high on
the shoulders of these slaves
the girls look out through the curtains
to see the crowded streets below them
they traversed the city past the
coliseum but then turn off
to climb up the hill to the portuguese
of libya
it was built by olivia the wife of the
first emperor augustus
on the site of the house of vedius polio
he wasn't such a great guy he once tried
to feed a slave
to the eels and his fish pond for simply
dropping a dish
luckily the emperor was at the dinner
and tamed his temper
the litters are placed on the ground and
the girls get out
and arm in arm two by two they ascend
the steps
into the enclosed garden with its many
columns
domitia 3 has shot off and is drawing on
a column
domitia 2 joins her but seeks to read
the graffiti
higher up on the column she spots a
drawing of gladiators
and tries to imagine seeing them
fighting something she will never be
permitted to do
except from the very rear of the
coliseum
from there she will have a good view of
the 50 000 spectators
but will see little by way of blood and
gore
if she really wanted a decent view she
could become a vestal virgin
and would sit right down the front but a
career
tending the sacred flame of vesta is not
to everybody's taste
domitia 1 has met another 10 year old
also
decked out in the insignia of betrothal
home time when they get there after the
eighth hour
something is up the smash dish
lies on the floor all the slaves have
been gathered together
in the atrium and await the arrival of
their master
dad is going to go mad he will not hit
his children
but like many other romans he believes
that slaves have to be punished
the whip lies ready for his arrival no
one knows who smashed the dish
but dad will call the undertaker to
torture it out of them if he must
the doorkeeper opens the front door to
the house
a hush comes over the anxious slaves in
walks not their master
but instead a pregnant teenager it is
the master's eldest daughter
age 15 who is already a veteran of
marriage and childbirth
guess what her name is there is a five
to ten percent chance
she won't survive giving birth to her
child but for now
she has come to dinner with her family
as a teenage mother
she has proved that she is a successful
wife by
bringing children and descendants for
her husband he will carry on his name in
the future
the family head off to the dining room
and are served dinner it would seem
dad has had an invite to dinner
elsewhere
with dinner concluded the girls crossed
the atrium to bid farewell to their
older sister
who's carried home in a litter escorted
by some of dad's bodyguards
returning to the house the girls cross
the atrium
the slaves young and old male and female
await the return of their owner
when he returns he may exact vengeance
ensuring his power over the slaves is
maintained through violence and terror
to which any slave could be subjected
but for the girls they head upstairs for
the night ready for bed
you